# rodent_borne_diseases
R code to analize and predict rodent-borne diseases associated with land use.

Please make reference of this work as: 

Gabriel E. García-Peña, André V. Rubio, Hugo Mendoza, Miguel Fernández, Matthew T. Milholland, A. Alonso Aguirre, Gerardo Suzán, Carlos Zambrana-Torrelio. 2021. Land-use change and rodent-borne diseases: Hazards on the shared socioeconomic pathways. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B.

Developer: Gabriel E. García-Peña


# Index

## 1_fetch_compile_data.R 
    Read data obtained from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF): https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.pqwhfw), 
    Clean the data
    Compile historical data on land-use with the location and year of each sample in the database.

## 2_map_CART.R 
    Read historical data copiled into de file: data_gbif_luc.rds # SEE FILE: 1_clean_compile_data.R
    Perform (RPART aka CART) Recursive partitioning / Classification tree analysis (CART), and predict presence in future land-use scenarios.
    Publish resuts for each species as vectors in a map (geojson)

## 3_zoonotic_hazard_by_cell.R
    Compile all the predictions from geojson files generated with 2_map_CART.R
    Filter out species with less than 10 observations
    Calculate zoonotic hazard, and richness for each geographic cell


## 4_Map_Algebra.R
    Read zoonotic hazard for each of the land use scenarios, generated by the file 3_zoonotic_hazard_by_cell.R
    Perform map algebra to calculate differences in hazard between scenarios 
    Publish results in a raster

## DATA: 
DATA_SHARED_SOCIOECONOMIC_PATHS.zip = Contains data with values of zoonotic hazard in different scenarios
raster_FTPS = Contains rasters with zoonotic hazards in the different scenarios.

   ### Zoonotic hazard in the scenarios
      SSP1_2025 = Zoonotic hazard in the Sustainable scenario SSP1 in 2025
      SSP1_2050 = Zoonotic hazard in the Sustainable scenario SSP1 in 2050
      SSP4_2050 = Zoonotic hazard in the deepening inequality SSP4 in 2050
      SSP5_2050 = Zoonotic hazard in the scenario of fossil fuel development in 2050

   ### Hazard change
      SSP4_2050_SSP1_2025 =  SSP4_2050 - SSP1_2025
      SSP5_2050_SSP1_2025 =  SSP5_2050 - SSP1_2025
      
   ### Costs
      SSP4_2050_SSP1_2050 =  SSP4_2050 - SSP1_2050
      SSP5_2050_SSP1_2050 =  SSP5_2050 - SSP1_2050




